Okay, can I start now?
Okay, sorry for the delay.
So, I will try to present about how Indonesian teams doing translation for several transition projects I have involved with.
Okay, this start from one project.
I mean, I have the calculate, I have create statistic from one project.
And then I try to add other project that I have greatly miscalculate the effort need to do the statistic.
But you will see how difficult, maybe because I'm not skilled enough to create the statistic long term one.
Maybe some of you can help me.
So, this is the start. Why we Indonesian team doing translation? Because in Indonesia we have around 276 million people there.
And from this many people we have several major languages. Actually we have more than 1000 languages, especially here.
Every, every, what do you call, every small density, we call in Indonesia is Desa, Kampong.
Village, yes, village. Every village has their own languages. But do we really need to support or translate to everything? No.
So, at least we need to consider that to translate in this big six, one, two, three, four, five, six languages.
But I, myself, I only fluent in Indonesian and Japanese, so I cannot help the other languages.
So, my, my, my, I try to, okay, let's start with one language that you say, used by the most of people here.
So, so we can, we can start doing something then can be quickly used by many people.
Okay. So, then in my talk I will compare about the Bravis, GNOME and Ubuntu. Why three of them?
Because I thought they have sufficient data to create a long time historical data.
I thought, but let me see how difficult it is to, to extract this.
The other thing that, that three of them has periodic release schedule, good release schedule.
For instance, LibreOffice is in February right now. I think last year they, they released in March and September.
But I think starting this year, February and September.
And then GNOME, GNOME usually a little later than, than LibreOffice.
They also release two times each year. Also Ubuntu, Ubuntu you can see from the version numbering.
Something 04, something 10. So every, every April and October Ubuntu release the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the platform to, to the translation for current one.
They have very detailed, very good statistic. But if you want to see the previous version, especially the version mentioned that maybe it's already out of support or something.
It's, it's not easy.
So with that in mind, I plan to compare how many string changes in its release.
Is it easy to get this kind of data? How many string changes in its release?
It's difficult. Why, why is it important? Why is it important that, that we translator need to know how many string or how many words need, because we need to, to have size to, to, to try to guess how many, how many days, how many days, how many days.
How many hours we need, we need to, to spend to do, to do this translation.
I think, I think it, it, it will be helpful for, for every project that they can, can create that kind of data extract to prepare those transient themes.
But how far translation for instance, you can, you can use, usually you can use percentage. Some projects use the percentage to, to filter out all this, this language translation is definitely include into release.
Maybe less than a certain percent is, is like, like the mother most, it's beta version or something.
So, again, for current version, this number is easily, ah, fine out. But, but for past releases, yeah, you need to, ah, I don't know.
Some, some, some platform maybe still have the data, the other now.
And the other thing is, I want to, how, how, who did this translation?
For, for instance, in, in, in my teams, ah, in, in this project, I have, ah, let's say 10 members and this project 5 members, who really do the, the nation?
Not all platform can provide that, that kind of data. But GNOME, ah, because the workflow is using, ah, the whole file, download, ah, claim to be translated, then upload.
So, so it is quite, ah, obvious who doing what kind of translation.
Okay, so let's see. LibreOffice.
Right now, the, the main platform is, we have played.
It has powerful search facility. Too many options. It's quite difficult to, to get, ah, ah, the, the correct, correct query to, to, to, to, ah, convey my, my need to, to extract.
Ah, data I need. It also has, we have played API. Maybe I'm, I'm old school, never use API, so when I try, so many data, so many options, how to, how to create the correct API to, ah, this.
So, actually, we have played, ah, it's good, but, but, need, need time. I'm not sure, ah, where, where to, who, who, who has, ah, access, ah, create something from their API.
I, I want to learn from him or her or something.
Yeah, the other thing that, ah, from the weblet, ah, they create a crown, they create, ah, ah, schedule job to push from this, transition platform into the main repository, kit repository.
So, actually, ah, I can choose between, ah, source of data, data source. Do I want to take from weblet directly or from the git repo?
I tried to access the git repo also. For instance, ah, ah, I, I get, I create a clone and then, ah, change to a certain release and then, ah, there is a git repo for, for Indonesian translation.
So, from the directory, I try to list all of commits. From there, I can try to see how many, ah, line changes. Who do commits, but actually, when web, ah, when someone doing translation in, in web,
from weblet, the data stop in, in weblet because commit from weblet to the, the git is done by some special, ah, special account, not the initial translator.
So, so, there is data missing there. If we, we, ah, take from git commits, but, ah, some other details, it's good.
And actually, the, the data I, I can present here came from way back machine and from my wiki because I, I, I maintain a wiki to, to maintain. I, I, and maybe 20, 30 translation projects to Indonesia.
So, so many. So, I, I don't want to make a bookmark. My wiki is my bookmark for translation. So, this is the result. This is the latest status.
The office. You see that, ah, UI only 99% of, ah, ah, finished. Only a few, this, this few strings not, not here. It's because we, we are not, not sure how to translate.
This is missing context. Now, but, but this one is very bad. Help 70% and even for the newest release, less than 70%.
UI for this, ah, ah, two, ah, ah, last four years. So, any, ah, between, between releases is, is, is six months. So, this four years. Relatively, almost 100%.
That for help.
So, a French version 70, 7.0. We have 3,000 strings.
And right now, ah, 18,000.
Untranslated. We, we have a good, good, ah, result when in version 6.2, UI and help for admission 100% translated.
We, ah, that can happen because we, we did, ah, translation spring, ah, two or three days and how many people, maybe 30 people or something.
Going together, boom, zero, untranslated. That unknown quality.
Because, because they, they, they start transit only for, for that, for that occasion. Yeah, we, we tried it.
Oh, so this time we tried to, to, ah, quantity, not quality. So, let's try.
But after that, we, we don't have, ah, they are, they are only involved in, in, in that occasion.
After that, ah, the long-term translator do not have enough energy to continue help.
I, I, I sometimes try to, ah, maybe 10 or 20, 20 string to translate.
Why? Because if UI, one string usually consists of maybe from one word to five, maybe 10, the longest one.
But help string. One string consists of 30 words, 40 words, 50 words, ah, so long.
So, ah, ah, you cannot compare only, only a certain string. No, no, no.
You need to see how many words that really, ah, show how large effort need to, to, to do them.
Okay. So, who did? Actually, only two.
These three, I think, they involved in updating the, the source, not, not doing the translation, but, but they search, ah, ah, giving this data.
Okay. That's LibreOffice. And then, let's see GNOME.
These are the latest. You can see GNOME, GNOME, ah, divide their many modules into several categories.
What we need to, ah, translate is usually, ah, we prioritize translation in this one, user interface for this, this group.
But other groups usually, we, we, for instance, GIM and FRAMPS.
This, this, ah, I never touch those for maybe, ah, for many years.
Because not every project are easy to be translated.
Especially if, for GIM is, ah, image editor.
I'm not familiar about the terms used in, in this, this, ah, this community.
What kind of translation usually use?
So, so I, I, I, I, I don't have enough time to consult with, with, ah, what we call, ah, SME, subject matter expert on image processing, image editor.
So, I didn't do that.
But other, ah, the, ah, UI is good. Help, ah, still some effort to do that, but, but not quite good.
Yeah. This is the statistic.
Since version 3.6, GNOME, Indonesian translation is almost always 100%.
And help getting better.
This period I have too much free time. So, I do many, many translations.
And then after that, ah, VC time.
This how many commits? This to, to, to calculate who did commit?
Actually only two people here.
Two people can, can maintain that kind of, ah, percentage quality for how many years?
I don't remember. Maybe 10 more.
I started as a GNOME Indonesian Transition Connector in 2010.
I offer many people, would you replace me and, and when come forward?
Nothing special with translation coordinator.
It's because no one else want to do that.
Okay. Ubuntu is the most difficult one.
Yeah. You see here?
I'm translating 200,000. So much. Why?
Because many of them GCC. Do you want GCC to be translated?
Why? Do you want GDB to be translated?
Exhib, library. So, so, so, so, because you want to use that, ah, what was the preference?
Trans, ah, what, what is the?
Transfects.
Transfects, eh?
They, they do not create a subcategory. So, so, it's quite misleading.
How, how good Indonesian was translated into Ubuntu.
How good, for any language is, ah, how good translated into this, any language.
Okay. Ah, I think that's the statistic that, statistic analyzer, someone said it.
So, so, why, why, why I care about this?
Because I hope that if some other team can, can recreate the, the effort to, to do that,
that, maybe they can use that for create a funding proposal or maybe, ah, can be used to plan transition phase,
ah, spring, need for many people, ah, how, how long and target to can, can be, ah, can finish how many strings.
It's, it's, it's rather difficult to, to use data from one language into others, yeah.
But, but at least we can have, ah, approximation.
Okay. I think that's my thought. Any question?
Good. Ah, sorry, yes.
Yes.
Because we are all from Asian, right? And, ah, I'm not very familiar with the Indonesian, but I know you did a lot of translation work for upstream like Ubuntu.
Okay. Ah, if I, if I come back to China, I want to do, okay, I want to do some translation for the upstream, ah, over assistance.
So, ah, how can I solve it?
Sorry. Sorry. How can you start?
Ah, sorry, ah, what kind of language do you, Chinese?
Because, ah, as, as far as I know, in Ubuntu, they, they have traditional Chinese and the other one.
So, so, so you just joined those, those existing team and start translating. I think it's, it's quite, quite easy.
I think, ah, I'm not sure what is the number, but, but it's already has a team, already has many translators, but you can join them and then, then continue.
I think for a language that has not been started, it's rather difficult, but, but for Chinese, I think.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, Ubuntu, Ubuntu is, is, is quite established, I think, for the Chinese translation.
For different projects, ah, you need to check, they, they, they have different, different way to, to do translation, different way to, different platform, different, different.
So, for instance, ah, like my, my three example, GNOME, LibreOffice and Ubuntu, different platform, different, ah, algorithm, process, different process.
GNOME, they, they need to take the, the whole file, translation file, doing translation locally in your computer and then upload back to the system.
The other one, Ubuntu and LibreOffice, you can do two way, you can do translation online or, or you can download the file, translate locally, upload back.
Okay, other question? No? Ah, yes.
Because in the beginning you mentioned you have had some problems using the WebLay API for your projects. How many projects, different languages actually do you use within the WebLay process? Six, I think, right? Six different Indonesian languages, local languages?
No, no, no, no, I only, only one main Indonesian.
So it's only one project?
Yeah, code name ID.
And what, what, especially are problems with the API?
Ah, for instance, ah, ah, if I want to see, ah, which one?
How, how many strings left? Not translated yet.
For help. This version, help.
API can only, ah, need, need, need to be, need to be expressed with, ah, URL and then, ah, main function and then project name, project name is, ah, they have a list of, ah,
UI master, UI version, ah, certain, and then help, master, help.
So, that's the project name. And then the, the next component is, what do you call? Module or something?
Module, ah, from, from this, this one, one project name, they has 200 modules or something.
And then slash language, ID. Ah, so, ah, it says, I need to, I need to iterate all those things and create the, the summary to add and then something.
It's, ah, quite difficult for me.
So, it's more an organizational problem?
Yeah, yeah. So, so, maybe because, because I don't understand enough the API, so, so my, my, my approach is not efficient enough.
So, that's, that's why I, I need to consult or discuss with whoever, ah, more familiar with this, this API, that API.
Okay. No more questions. Thank you.